doc: Add sysbuild migration guide (#15845)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/releases_and_maturity/migration/migration_sysbuild.rst

Applications must set this at the sysbuild level if you want the Bluetooth Fast Pair data generated.
The method of supplying the key data via the command line arguments remains unchanged from previous |NCS| versions.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_matter:

Matter (Connected home over IP)
###############################

Sysbuild now directly controls Matter configuration for generating factory data and over-the-air firmware update images.
The following Kconfig options are available:

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Kconfig option                                                      | Description                                       |
+=====================================================================+===================================================+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MATTER`                                  | Enable matter support                             |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+

> | :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MATTER_FACTORY_DATA`                     | Generate factory data                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MATTER_FACTORY_DATA_GENERATE`                     | Generate factory data                             |
```

Author: Fixed

            SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_OVERWRITE_ONLY=y
            SB_CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_TYPE_RSA=y

    .. group-tab:: Kconfig.sysbuild

        This example enables MCUboot, sets the key type to RSA, and specifies the overwrite-only mode for the nRF5340 development kit application CPU:

        .. code-block:: kconfig

            if BOARD_NRF5340DK_NRF5340_CPUAPP

            choice BOOTLOADER
                    default BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT
            endchoice

            if BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT

            choice MCUBOOT_MODE
                    default MCUBOOT_MODE_OVERWRITE_ONLY
            endchoice

            choice BOOT_SIGNATURE_TYPE
                    default BOOT_SIGNATURE_TYPE_RSA
            endchoice

            endif # BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT

           endif # BOARD_NRF5340DK_NRF5340_CPUAPP

Both approaches are used in |NCS| applications and samples depending on the required configuration.

.. note::

    Sysbuild has :ref:`file suffix support <sysbuild_file_suffixes>`, which means different files can be created and used depending on whether a file suffix is used for a build.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_network_core:

> Network core
> ############

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Network core
============
```

+---------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_NETCORE_NONE`                | No network core image                                                                                     |
+---------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_NETCORE_APP_UPDATE`          | Will enable network core image update support in MCUboot (PCD)                                            |
+---------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

If a project uses network-core functionality (for example, Bluetooth) in the main application but does not enable a network-core image in sysbuild, then no network-core image will be built, resulting in a non-working application.
Projects must be updated to select the correct network core image.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_mcuboot:

> MCUboot
> #######

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MCUboot
=======
```

+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_MCUBOOT_VERSION`                   | MCUboot version string to use when creating MCUboot update package for application secure boot mode                      |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Support for unsigned images and image encryption has been added.
These options generate the respective output files for the main application build.
Any MCUboot configuration that was previously done in the main application or MCUboot needs to be updated to apply at the sysbuild level.
If this is not done, the settings of these builds will be forcefully replaced with the default generated by sysbuild, making firmware updates incompatible with firmware images built in previous versions of |NCS|.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_secure_boot:

> Secure boot
> ###########

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secure boot
===========
```

If not, the secure boot images are not built, or the settings of these builds are forcefully replaced with the default generated by sysbuild, making firmware updates incompatible with firmware images built in previous versions of |NCS|.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_bluetooth_fast_pair:

Bluetooth fast pair
###################

Sysbuild now handles Bluetooth Fast Pair hex generation.
The following Kconfig options are available:

+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Kconfig option                           | Description                               |
+==========================================+===========================================+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR` | Enables Bluetooth fast pair functionality |
+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+

Applications must set this at the sysbuild level if you want the Bluetooth Fast Pair data generated.
The method of supplying the key data via the command line arguments remains unchanged from previous |NCS| versions.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_matter:

> Matter (Connected home over IP)
> ###############################

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Matter (Connected home over IP)
===============================
```

| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_DFU_ZIP_NET`                     | Include network-core image update in zip archive                           |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_DFU_ZIP_WIFI_FW_PATCH`           | Include nRF700x firmware patch update in zip archive                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_DFU_ZIP_BLUETOOTH_MESH_METADATA` | Include Bluetooth mesh metadata in zip archive                             |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+

You must update your application to select the required Kconfig options at the sysbuild level to have the correct firmware update images in the zip generated, the firmware zip is generated by default.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_partition_manager:

> Partition manager
> #################

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Partition manager
=================
```

> Support for using partition for an image has moved to sysbuild.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The support for using a partition for an image was moved to sysbuild.
```

| ``dfu_multi_image.bin``                             | DFU multi image file containing firmware update files and manifest                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``matter.ota``                                      | Matter over-the-air firmware update file                                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``dfu_application.zip``                             | Zip file containing firmware update files and manifest                                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_image_overlay_changes:

> Image overlay configuration
> ###########################

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Image overlay configuration
===========================
```

+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``sysbuild/mcuboot/boards/nrf52840dk_nrf52840.overlay``      | DTS overlay for the ``nrf52840dk/nrf52840`` board target, note: used **instead** of app.overlay, not with as child/parent used to do      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``sysbuild/mcuboot/boards/nrf9160dk_nrf9160_0_14_0.overlay`` | DTS overlay for the ``nrf9160dk@0.14.0/nrf9160`` board target, note: used **instead** of app.overlay, not with as child/parent used to do |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_scope_changes:

> Scope changes
> #############

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scope changes
=============
```

| ``-DSNIPPET=...``             | Applies to main application only | Applies to all images |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| ``-D<image>_SNIPPET=...``     | Applies to <image> only                                  |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| ``-DSHIELD=...``              | Applies to main application only | Applies to all images |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------+-----------------------+
| ``-D<image>_SHIELD=...``      | Applies to <image> only                                  |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+

Configuration values that specify Kconfig fragment or overlay files (for example, ``EXTRA_CONF_FILE`` and ``EXTRA_DTC_OVERLAY_FILE``) cannot be applied globally using either child/parent image or sysbuild.
They function the same in both systems:

* Without a prefix, they will be applied to the main application only.

* With a prefix, they will apply to that specific image only.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_building:

> Building with sysbuild
> ######################

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building with sysbuild
======================
```

With |NCS| 2.7, building with ``west`` will use sysbuild by default in |NCS| repositories.
To maintain compatibility with child/parent images, out-of-tree applications will not use sysbuild by default.
Twister does not inherit this change and will not use sysbuild unless tests are updated.
Similarly, CMake will not configure projects using sysbuild unless the invocation command is updated.

.. note::

>     Sysbuild can optionally be set as the default when using west, this means that unless west is ran with ``--no-sysbuild`` then it will always use sysbuild

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Sysbuild can optionally be set as the default when using west.
    This means that unless west is ran with ``--no-sysbuild`` then it will always use sysbuild
```

    .. group-tab:: cmake (sysbuild)

        CMake can be used to configure a specific project using sysbuild image with the following command:

        .. code-block:: console

           cmake -GNinja -DBOARD=<board> -DAPP_DIR=<app_path> <path_to_zephyr>/share/sysbuild

    .. group-tab:: cmake (child/parent image)

        CMake can be used to configure a specific project using child/parent image with the following command:

        .. code-block:: console

           cmake -GNinja -DBOARD=<board> <app_path>

        .. note::

            This is deprecated in |NCS| 2.7 and support will be removed in |NCS| 2.9

    .. group-tab:: twister (sysbuild)

        Twister test cases can build using sysbuild with the following:

        .. code-block:: yaml

            sysbuild: true

    .. group-tab:: twister (child/parent image)

        Twister test cases can build using child/parent image with the following:

        .. code-block:: yaml

            sysbuild: false

        .. note::

            This is deprecated in |NCS| 2.7 and support will be removed in |NCS| 2.9

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_incompatibilities:

> Incompatibities
> ###############

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Incompatibities
===============
```

With the sysbulild release in |NCS| 2.7, some features of child/parent image are not supported, which include:

> * Using pre-built hex files for images (e.g. MCUboot), all images in a project will be built from source

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Using pre-built HEX files for images (like MCUboot).
   All images in a project will be built from source
```

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration:

Migrating from multi-image builds to sysbuild
#############################################

:ref:`sysbuild` is a build system used in zephyr to configure, build, and flash multiple images as part of a single project.
It replaces the :ref:`child/parent system for multi-image builds <ug_multi_image>` in |NCS|.
As the previous system has been deprecated, you must update your existing multi-image build projects to support being built using sysbuild.

The following are the differences in how project configuration is performed in sysbuild compared to child/parent image configuration:

* Sysbuild controls which images are added to a build, instead of the main application.
* Sysbuild specifies the project configuration for all images, which was previously done in the main application or child applications.
* Sysbuild controls the packaging of firmware components, instead of the main application.
* Sysbuild manages some software functionality of image builds, such as the configuration mode of an nRF70-series radio.
* Sysbuild runs partition manager code (if enabled) and distributes the output information to images.

> 

Reviewer 3: + If I'm not mistaken images are unaware of their configuration and anything that involves setting things/other dependencies in more than one image must be moved into sysbuild level.

> 

Author: This is outside the scope of sysbuild as it would be the same thing in child/parent, if e.g. you enable logging on the main image, it will not enable logging on any other image

> 

Reviewer 4: I don't agree that this is outside the scope of sysbuild.

Due to some KConfigs becoming sysbuild KConfigs, we have been forced to create duplicate overlays customizing both sysbuild and application Kconfigs for sample build configurations where, previously, only a single overlay sufficed.

Some kind of solution to allow us to return to a single overlay or config value would be greatly appreciated for simplifying build configuration for these samples.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration:

> Migrating from child/parent image to sysbuild

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Migrating multi-image builds to sysbuild
```

*********************************************

:ref:`sysbuild` is a build system used in zephyr used to configure, build, and flash multiple images as part of a single project.

> it replaces :ref:`child/parent images <ug_multi_image>` in |NCS|.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It replaces the :ref:`child/parent system for multi-image builds <ug_multi_image>`  in |NCS|.
```

> As child/parent image has been deprecated,  you must update your projects to support being built using sysbuild.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the previous system has been deprecated,  you must update your existing multi-image build projects to support being built using sysbuild.
```

The following are the differences in how project configuration is performed in sysbuild compared to child/parent image configuration:

> * Sysbuild controls which images are added to a build, instead of the main application.
> 
> * Sysbuild specifies the project configuration for all images, which was previously done in the main application or child applications.
> 
> * Sysbuild controls the packaging of firmware components, instead of the main application.
> 
> * Sysbuild manages some software functionality of image builds, such as the configuration mode of an nRF70-series radio.
> 
> * Sysbuild runs partition manager code (if enabled) and distributes the output information to images.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Sysbuild controls which images are added to a build, rather than the main application.
* Sysbuild specifies the project configuration for all images.
  This was previously handled by the main application or child applications.
* Sysbuild controls the packaging of firmware components, rather than the main application.
* Sysbuild manages some software functionality of image builds, such as the configuration mode of an nRF70-series radio.
* Sysbuild executes partition manager code (if enabled) and distributes the output information to images.
```

Author: I had this before from your previous edits and it crushed all the text onto a single line without making it a list

If not, the secure boot images are not built, or the settings of these builds are forcefully replaced with the default generated by sysbuild, making firmware updates incompatible with firmware images built in previous versions of the |NCS|.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_bluetooth_fast_pair:

Bluetooth fast pair
===================

Sysbuild now handles the HEX generation of Bluetooth Fast Pair.
The following Kconfig options are available:

+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Kconfig option                           | Description                               |
+==========================================+===========================================+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR` | Enables Bluetooth fast pair functionality |
+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+

Applications must set this at the sysbuild level if you want the Bluetooth Fast Pair data generated.
The method of supplying the key data via the command line arguments remains unchanged from previous |NCS| versions.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_matter:

> Matter (Connected home over IP)
> ===============================

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Matter
======
```
Let's not use the old naming convention.

| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_SIGNING_PUBLIC_KEY` | Absolute path to signing key public file                                                |
+------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_PUBLIC_KEY_FILES`   | Comma-separated value list of absolute paths to signing public key files                |
+------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Secure boot can now be enabled centrally from sysbuild for both the application and network cores for nRF53-based boards.
Configuration that was previously done in the images themselves must now be applied at the sysbuild level.
If not, the secure boot images are not built, or the settings of these builds are forcefully replaced with the default generated by sysbuild, making firmware updates incompatible with firmware images built in previous versions of the |NCS|.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_bluetooth_fast_pair:

> Bluetooth fast pair

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Google Fast Pair
```

===================

> Sysbuild now handles the HEX generation of Bluetooth Fast Pair.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Sysbuild now handles the HEX generation with Google Fast Pair provisioning data.
See the :ref:`ug_bt_fast_pair_provisioning_register` section in the Fast Pair integration guide for more details regarding the provisioning process.

```

The following Kconfig options are available:

+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Kconfig option                           | Description                               |
+==========================================+===========================================+

> | :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR` | Enables Bluetooth fast pair functionality |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR` | Enables Google Fast Pair functionality |
```

+------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+

> Applications must set this at the sysbuild level if you want the Bluetooth Fast Pair data generated.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To generate the Google Fast Pair provisioning data, you must set this Kconfig option at the sysbuild level.
```

> The method of supplying the key data via the command line arguments remains unchanged from previous |NCS| versions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The method of supplying the Fast Pair Model ID and Anti-Spoofing Private Key via the command line arguments remains unchanged from previous |NCS| versions.
```

> 

Reviewer 6: Consider adding a note that we have in our Fast Pair service documentation:

```
.. note::
   When building with sysbuild, value of the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR` Kconfig option is overwritten by ``SB_CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR``.
   For more details about enabling Fast Pair for your application, see the :ref:`ug_bt_fast_pair_prerequisite_ops_kconfig` section in the Fast Pair integration guide.
```

* Sysbuild manages some software functionality of image builds, such as the configuration mode of an nRF70-series radio.
* Sysbuild runs partition manager code (if enabled) and distributes the output information to images.

This results in the CMake configuration step running more than once, as this information is only available after all images have been processed.

* Sysbuild output files have different names and locations (they are namespaced).
* Sysbuild introduces support for file suffixes, replacing the deprecated build type used by child/parent images.

The changes needed to convert a child/parent image project to a Sysbuild project depend on the features used.
Review how :ref:`sysbuild` works to understand the basic usage and configuration methods, and how these differ from a single image build, before proceeding with project migration according to the guidelines listed in the following sections.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_sysbuild_configuration_file:

Sysbuild configuration files
============================

You can set sysbuild configuration for projects in the ``sysbuild.conf`` file in the project folder.

> You can also add custom Kconfig values in the ``Kconfig.sysbuild`` file or use this file to set Kconfig defaults that depend on a board or other parameters when building a project.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
You can also add custom Kconfig values in the ``Kconfig.sysbuild`` file in the project folder, or use this file to set Kconfig defaults that depend on a board or other parameters when building a project.
```
The location of Kconfig.sysbuild should be handled similar to sysbuild.conf

+-----------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``dfu_application.zip``                             | Zip file containing firmware update files and manifest                                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_image_overlay_changes:

Image overlay configuration
===========================

In child/parent image configurations, an application could include additional configuration files in the ``child_image`` folder that would be applied to these images (see :ref:`ug_multi_image_permanent_changes`).
This feature has been adapted in sysbuild; see :ref:`sysbuild_application_configuration` for an overview.
You must update child/parent image configuration to use it with sysbuild, as the way these files can be used differs:

* In child/parent image configurations, there can be Kconfig fragments and board overlays that are all used.

> * In sysbuild, this is not supported.

Reviewer 7: I have a problem parsing the bullet point in question. We state things that aren't supported any more (with sysbuild) but coming paragraphs describe the changes (and adaptations) giving pretty much the same functionality at the end...

So the statement "In sysbuild, this is not supported" is only pointing to ``child_image``fragments and overlays. Maybe the bullet-point can be a bit more clear, so it doesn't seem like we are losing functionality

You can either have a Kconfig fragment overlay or change the whole application configuration directory.
If an image application configuration directory is created, it must include all the required files for that image, as none of the original application configuration files will be used.
Sysbuild includes support for :ref:`application-file-suffixes` in applications, and it can also use :ref:`sysbuild_file_suffixes`.

Example for MCUboot
===================

The following table shows how to add custom MCUboot configuration for a project.

> The ``sysbuild`` folder should be created in the application's folder:

Reviewer 7: should be => must be?

Are we explaining a rule or a "best practice" here

        .. code-block:: yaml

            sysbuild: false

        .. note::

            This is deprecated in |NCS| 2.7 and support will be removed in |NCS| 2.9

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_forced_kconfig_options:

Forced Kconfig options
======================

As sysbuild deals with configuration of features for some features and propagating this information to other images, some Kconfig options in applications will be forcefully overwritten by sysbuild, for details on these options and how to set them from sysbuild, check the :ref:`sysbuild_forced_options` section.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_incompatibilities:

Incompatibities
===============

In the sysbuild release included in the |NCS| 2.7, the following features of the multi-image builds using child an parent images are not supported:

* Using pre-built HEX files for images (like MCUboot).
    All images in a project will be built from source

    As a workaround for this, you can first build a project, then use ``mergehex`` manually to merge the project output HEX file with a previously-generated HEX file in overwrite mode to replace that firmware in the output image.

> * Building an image for the nRF5340 network core as the primary image and including an application core image

Reviewer 8: It is added in dtm and radio_test

| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_SIGNING_PUBLIC_KEY` | Absolute path to signing key public file                                                |
+------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_PUBLIC_KEY_FILES`   | Comma-separated value list of absolute paths to signing public key files                |
+------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Secure boot can now be enabled centrally from sysbuild for both the application and network cores for nRF53-based boards.
Configuration that was previously done in the images themselves must now be applied at the sysbuild level.
If not, the secure boot images are not built, or the settings of these builds are forcefully replaced with the default generated by sysbuild, making firmware updates incompatible with firmware images built in previous versions of the |NCS|.

.. _child_parent_to_sysbuild_migration_bluetooth_fast_pair:

> Google fast pair

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Google Fast Pair
```

================

Sysbuild now handles the HEX generation with Google Fast Pair provisioning data.
See the :ref:`ug_bt_fast_pair_provisioning_register` section in the Fast Pair integration guide for more details regarding the provisioning process.
The following Kconfig options are available:

+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------+
| Kconfig option                           | Description                            |
+==========================================+========================================+

> | :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR` | Enables Google fast pair functionality |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BT_FAST_PAIR` | Enables Google Fast Pair functionality |
```
